# BitcoindAdapter

This is a spring boot project to mantain a REST-queriable memPool and send new transactions and blocks via kafka message broker. 
It works as a bitcoind adapter which queries bitcoind for mempool transactions and new blocks continuously. 
The main difference with a simple call to bitcoind's getrawmempool is that transaction data includes input and output addresses, 
so you don't have to do several queries, bitcoindAdapter does it for you. This is quite useful for building a memPoolExplorer service. 
It also serves as memPool cache to avoid overloading bitcoind.
In order to compare the transactions in mined blocks with the transactions that your mempool would have mined, 
the result of a getblockTemplate call is also sent via kafka messsage.  

BitcoindAdapter uses mainly these bitcoind RPC calls: 

  *	getrawmempool (verbose) to obtain the mempool, and then for each txInput in each transaction:
  * getRawTransaction (decoded) is called. 
  * getBlockHash, getBlock and getBlockCount.
  * getBlockTemplate
  
Mempool changes and new blocks are sent through a configurable kafka topic (memPool.tx.events). 
Mempool tx changes are guaranteed not to be sent when a new block is mined. 
That is, if a new block is detected after checking mempool changes, these changes are not sent or stored. 
They wait for the next refresh round to be sent and stored. This ensures a message order in which message consumers 
can store the new block transactions before they are removed from mempool in the next message, enabling consumers to 
compare mined block txs with mempool txs.  

Also, it uses a mongodb database for (optionally) storing the mempool.

## Requirements

* bitcoind 0.19.X
* mongodb
* java 11

## Usage

This is meant to be used in a docker environment. Go to commands project to see docker-compose examples 

## bitcoind configuration

You *must* have bitcoind running with `txindex=1` option and basic authentication. Use a bitcoind.conf file like this in your `~/.bitcoin/bitcoin.conf` folder.

```# Generated by https://jlopp.github.io/bitcoin-core-config-generator/

# This config should be placed in following path:
# ~/.bitcoin/bitcoin.conf

# [rpc]
# Username for JSON-RPC connections
rpcuser=myuser
# Password for JSON-RPC connections
rpcpassword=mypassword
# Maintain a full transaction index, used by the getrawtransaction rpc call.
txindex=1
# rpc ips allowed (Ip of this service must be included)
rpcallowip=X.X.X.X
# ip of bitcoind
rpcbind=192.168.3.2
# [Wallet]
# Do not load the wallet and disable wallet RPC calls.(optional)
disablewallet=1
# [core]
# Set database cache size in megabytes; machines sync faster with a larger cache. Recommend setting as high as possible based upon machine's available RAM. (optional)
dbcache=4000
```
## .properties configuration

.properties file are loaded by configurationServer service. These properties are almost auto-explicative:

* `refreshIntervalSec: "5"`
Interval of mempool refreshing. (a new getrawMempool, getRawTransaction, getBlockCount and getBlockTemplate is made). 
Only one thread is used for refreshing, if it takes more time than this interval, no other thread will be launch. 
(to avoid overload and concurrency problems)

* `bitcoindadapter.loadDBOnStart={true|false}`
Decides if bitcoindAdapter must try to load mempool from db when starting. If not, it will query all mempool txs to bitcoind (it can takes hours). Normally mempool in db will be in part outdated. bitcoindAdapter will use txs which are still in mempool and discard the old ones. This saves a lot of time.

* `bitcoindadapter.saveDBOnStart={true|false}`
Decides if bitcoindAdapter must save mempool when fully loaded and updated at start.

* `bitcoindadapter.saveDBOnRefresh={true|false}`
Saves mempool changes in db for each mempool refresh the application does.

* `bitcoindadapter.maxMemPoolSizeReturnedInTxNumber=300`
REST API `/memPool/full`  returns all mempool, if tx number in mempool is above this number a http 413 error, "Payload Too Large" is returned. 
A value of 0 means unlimited (return full mempool always). 

* `bitcoindadapter.memPoolChangesSize=10`
REST API `/memPool/changes` returns last 10 changes in memPool.

* `bitcoindadapter.newBlockListSize=3`
REST API `/lastBlocks` return last 3 blocks

* `sendAllTxOnStart: true`
When the full mempool is first obtained, it's sent as a series of kafka messages. 


## REST API
* `/blockChain/lastBlocks` Returns a list with all last blocks recevived (normally last 3)
* `/blockChain/lastBlocksFrom/{epochSecond}/{nano}` Returns last blocks from epochSecond/nano
* `/blockChain/lastBlocksFrom/{height}` Returns last blocks from {height}
* `/blockTemplate/blockTemplate` Returns last blockTemplate consulted
* `/memPool` Returns a list with all txIds in mempool
* `/memPool/full` Returns all mempool if `bitcoindadapter.maxMemPoolSizeReturnedInTxNumber` property allows it.
* `/memPool/{txId}` Returns decoded tx with txId given as parameter
* `/memPool/changes` Returns last N changes in memPool, N defined in `bitcoindadapter.memPoolChangesSize` property.
* `/memPool/changesFrom/{changeCounter}` Returns last changes from changeCounter, each change is identified by a changeCounter and a epochSecond/nano.
* `/memPool/changesFrom/{epochSecond}/{nano}` Returns last changes from epochSecond/nano, each change is identified by a changeCounter and a epochSecond/nano.
* `/memPool/state` Returns memPool state  {STARTING|LOADINGFROMDB|LOADINGFROMBITCOINCLIENT|SAVINGTODB|STARTED}
* `/actuator` Access to spring boot actuator endpoint. Be aware that actuator port is defined in `management.port` property.
* `/actuator/metrics` Access to metrics like `mempool.transaction.count` or `mempool.refresh.time` to monitor app performance.
* `/alarms/list` List of errors or alarms of the service.

## ACTUATOR API

You can enter actuator via port `8081` `/actuator/ENDPOINT NAME` (i.e. `health, info`... etc)